Adding manual instructions for Postgres major version rolling upgrade - DOCS-95 (#5237)
EnterpriseDB/docs: product_docs/docs/pgd/5/admin-tpa/upgrading_major_rolling.mdx

---

> title: Performing a Postgres major version rolling upgrade 

Reviewer: Missing a navTitle and add deepToC: True to get more than two headings in the right hand nav bar

Author: Thanks!

---

## Performing a Postgres major version rolling upgrade

> This document outlines the procedure for performing a major version upgrade of a Postgres cluster using Postgres Distributed (PGD) as installed by Trusted Postgres Architect (TPA). The rolling upgrade process allows updating individual cluster nodes to a new major Postgres version while maintaining cluster availability and operational continuity. This approach minimizes downtime and ensures data integrity by allowing the rest of the cluster to remain operational as each node is upgraded sequentially. Upgrading your Postgres cluster to a newer major version is recommended to access improved features, performance enhancements, and security updates. This guide provides step-by-step instructions to facilitate a smooth and controlled upgrade process.

Reviewer: Break this up. It's just a wall of text.

Author: Yeah that needed breaking up.

!!! Note
Ensure that your databases and configuration files are backed up before starting the upgrade process to help prevent data loss.
!!!

To perform the rolling upgrade of the Postgres major version on your PGD cluster, carry out the following steps on each node in the cluster:

> - Confirm the current Postgres version.

Reviewer: That's a bare heading. At least provide some direction for how you would do this.
"Versions can be viewed from PGD by logging in and running: `select * from bdr.group_version_details;`"

> - Check to see if the target node is the write leader of the cluster.

Reviewer: As above, repeat with the minimal direction.

Author: I went ahead and added minimal direction to all of the steps in this next draft.

Author: I went ahead and went through this section to add more minimal direction at each step to be more tractable.

- If it is the write leader, perform a planned switchover to make another node write leader so you can upgrade the target node and ensure cluster availability.
- After confirming the target node is not the write leader, stop Postgres.
- Install the new Postgres version and bdr_pg_upgrade.
- Initialize the new Postgres version.
- Copy the configuration for the old Postgres version to the configuration for the new Postgres version.
- Rename the PGDATA directories.
- Stop all Postgres instances.
- Check that you can upgrade safely.
- Run the Postgres major version upgrade.
- Modify the Postgres service.
- Start Postgres.
- Validate the new Postgres version. 
- Test the upgrade directly against the newly upgraded node.
- Cleanup post-upgrade. 

We will look at these steps in more detail below, specifically for upgrading a node from Postgres 15 to Postgres 16. 

## Worked example

> A three-node cluster (kaftan, kaolin, and kaboom) we [deployed on AWS using TPA](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/quickstart/quick_start_aws/) is currently running Postgres 15 on a Linux OS (Debian in this case). We want to upgrade a single node to Postgres 16 using `bdr_pg_upgrade`, and then upgrade the rest of the cluster similarly. This walkthrough focuses on the detailed steps for the target node, kaboom. 

Reviewer: For this worked example, we start with a TPA cluster deployed using the AWS Quickstart. 

There are three nodes .....

We want to upgrade a single node to Postgres 16 using `bdr_pg_upgrade`, and then upgrade the rest of the cluster similarly. -> We want to upgrade a node to Postgres 16 as the first step of upgrading the entire cluster.

Author: Is it a TPA cluster or a PGD cluster though? With what I had written I was trying to convey that it was a PGD cluster deployed using TPA, isn't that accurate?

Reviewer: A pgd cluster deployed with TPA

!!! Note
Some steps of this process will involve you running commands as the Postgres owner. We will refer to this user as `postgres` throughout when appropriate. If you are running EDB Postgres Advanced Server, you will need to substitute that user with `enterprisedb` in all relevant commands.
!!!

### Confirm the current Postgres version

> Connect to any node that is still running Postgres 15 and use the following command to connect to PGD's `bdrdb` database:

Reviewer: Connect how? psql, ssh, http?

Author: Changed to SSH.

```bash
sudo -u postgres psql bdrdb
```
Then, when connected to bdrdb, use the following query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM bdr.group_versions_details;
```

You should see output similar to this for your cluster:

```
  node_id   | node_name |        postgres_version        | bdr_version 
------------+-----------+--------------------------------+-------------
 3490219809 | kaftan    | 15.5 (Debian 15.5-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
 2710197610 | kaboom    | 15.5 (Debian 15.5-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
 2111777360 | kaolin    | 15.5 (Debian 15.5-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
(3 rows)
```

Confirm that the Postgres version is the expected version. Then, use the `exit` command to return to the node's command prompt.

### Plan upgrade order

> The cluster must be available throughout the process (i.e., a *rolling* upgrade). To achieve continuous cluster availability, we must perform a [planned switchover](#performing-a-planned-switchover) of the write leader node before upgrading that node. We also want to keep the number of planned [switchovers](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/cli/command_ref/pgd_switchover/) to a minimum for availability and efficiency. Accordingly, we will upgrade the current write leader last in our upgrade order, so we only have to perform one planned switchover.

Reviewer: This is content which should be up top in the overall directions, not buried in the worked example. It applies to all rolling upgrades.

Author: Moved it.

To check to see which node is the current write leader, run the `pgd show-groups` command:

```bash
sudo -u postgres pgd show-groups
```

In our example, kaftan, is the current write leader:

```
Group        Group ID   Type   Parent Group Location Raft Routing Write Leader 
-----        --------   ----   ------------ -------- ---- ------- ------------ 
democluster  1935823863 global                       true false                
dc1_subgroup 1302278103 data   democluster  dc1      true true    kaftan   
```

The `pgd-show-groups` command shows all groups in the EDB Postgres Distributed cluster and their summary, including the current write leader.

Our upgrade plan can be to upgrade kaboom, upgrade kaolin, perform a planned switchover from kaftan to kaboom, and finally upgrade kaftan.

#### Performing a planned switchover

Since our target node in this walkthrough is kaboom, we won't need to perform a planned switchover yet. 

> When you are ready to upgrade kaftan, switchover the write leader from kaftan to kaboom with the following command:

Reviewer: Confusingly out of order.

Fix it by modifying the output of the show-groups to be kaboom, and then explaining that as kaboom is the write leader we will need to perform a switchover.

Author: Hmmm... yeah that is the order I had it in before, but because @MattWalliEDB suggested we would want to upgrade the shadow nodes before the write leader, I opted to have the worked example be a shadow node, as I thought the worked example should be the first node in the upgrade order. However, maybe the worked example can be of the last node to upgrade in the cluster, kaboom, which is the write-leader? I can give that a shot.

Reviewer: The flow is all wrong though - there should be advice to target shadow nodes first and a quick way to identify them but you will need to move the write leader on at some point

Author: I think I figured out a way with doing the shadow nodes first but also bringing the important content to the general directions.

```bash
sudo -u postgres pgd switchover --group-name dc1_subgroup --node-name kaboom
```

Then, run `pgd show-groups` to ensure the switchover was successful.

```bash
sudo -u postgres pgd show-groups
```

You will see that kaboom is now the write leader:

```
Group        Group ID   Type   Parent Group Location Raft Routing Write Leader 
-----        --------   ----   ------------ -------- ---- ------- ------------ 
democluster  1935823863 global                       true false                
dc1_subgroup 1302278103 data   democluster  dc1      true true    kaboom  
```

It is then safe to stop Postgres on kaftan.

### Stop Postgres on the target node

> If you are not already on the target node, use SSH to connect to the target node, in this case, kaboom, and then run:

Reviewer: Why not suggest they connect to the target node at the start?

Author: I changed it accordingly.

```bash
sudo systemctl stop postgres
```

> This command halts the server on the current node, kaboom. Your cluster will continue running using the other two nodes.

Reviewer: ... in this case, kaboom. 

Pausing review here.

---
title: Performing a Postgres major version rolling upgrade on a PGD cluster built with TPA
navTitle: Upgrade Postgres major version
deepToC: true
---

## Overview

> You can perform a major version upgrade of Postgres on a Postgres Distributed (PGD) cluster deployed by Trusted Postgres Architect (TPA).

Reviewer: Sounds like you are introducing a feature...

```suggestion
Upgrading a Postgres database's major version to access improved features, performance enhancements, and security updates is a common administration task. Doing the same for a Postgres Distributed (PGD) cluster deployed with Trusted Postgres Architect (TPA) is essentially the same process but performed as a rolling upgrade./
```

The rolling upgrade process allows updating individual cluster nodes to a new major Postgres version while maintaining cluster availability and operational continuity. This approach minimizes downtime and ensures data integrity by allowing the rest of the cluster to remain operational as each node is upgraded sequentially. 

> We recommend upgrading your Postgres cluster to a newer major version to access improved features, performance enhancements, and security updates. These step-by-step instructions and a worked example help to provide a smooth and controlled upgrade process.

Author: Done.

### Plan the upgrade

The cluster must be available throughout the process (that is, a *rolling* upgrade). To achieve continuous cluster availability, you must [perform a planned switchover](#performing-a-planned-switchover) of the [write leader](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/terminology/#write-leader) node before upgrading it so that a write leader is always available. 

> You can see which node is the write leader by connecting to the PGD cluster (for example, using SSH) and running the `pgd show-groups` command:

Reviewer: Missing - discussion about groups and subgroups. You need to bear in mind that you need to know what group/subgroup the nodes are in because its this group you are going to be rolling upgrading.
Also may need a note for when there are two regions... and no regions (you are upgrading nodes in the top-level group only). We can discuss.

Author: I am not following this 100%.  I could include a brief explanation of how groups and subgroups work in a PGD cluster. I thought the only relevant information using the show-groups command here was to learn which node is the write leader. We need to know which nodes belong to which group/subgroup? Could you explain this a bit more?

Reviewer: If you have two subgroups, you'll have a write leader in each group. (Possibly three, not sure if you could configure the top-level with routing too).... 

So, you need to know what sub-group you are upgrading because it has its own write leader and that's what the switchover will change.

Author: Okay I will add a little something on this near the beginning on preparing/planning the upgrade.

```bash
sudo -u postgres pgd show-groups
```

> To keep the number of planned [switchovers](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/cli/command_ref/pgd_switchover/) to a minimum, upgrade the current write leader last in your upgrade order, so you have to perform only [one planned switchover](#performing-a-planned-switchover) during the upgrade process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep the number of planned [switchovers](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/cli/command_ref/pgd_switchover/) to a minimum, put the current write leader last in your upgrade order. This will allow you to only perform [one planned switchover](#performing-a-planned-switchover) during the upgrade process.
```

### Perform the upgrade on each node

!!! Note
To help prevent data loss, ensure that your databases and configuration files are backed up before starting the upgrade process.
!!!

Next, perform the following steps on each node in order:

> 1. If the target node is the current write leader, perform a [planned switchover](#plan-the-upgrade).

Reviewer: Ok, couple of big comments here. This is the meat of the article, and it's one big step. And, what were numbered steps are not anymore because when you added notes to that broke the sequential count in markdown. Split them out into headings and make it sync with the worked example below.

Author: Split the steps up into headings as opposed to using numbers? I am not 100% on what you are suggesting here.

Reviewer: Go look at the deployment.

Every step is numbered 1.

And there's a lot of steps.

Break them up.

Put headings on them.

Make the headings match the worked example's headings.

Author: 1. I see that the numbering isn't working; I could fix that by indenting the note under each by one, but it looks like you are suggesting to do away with the ordered list. 
2. When you say break up the steps and put headings on them, are you saying to break each step apart from one another with a little whitespace and make them headings or break the steps up into groups of steps and then put headings on each group of steps? 
3. Making the headings match the worked example's headings is a little tricky as the general steps aren't quite 1:1 with the worked example steps with respect to order. For instance, the first step in the general directions that apply to each node is to perform a planned switchover if the target node in question is the current write leader. However, this step is in ### Next Steps of the worked example because the worked example is the upgrade of a shadow node (as it would be weird to start with the write leader in the worked example.

  - `sudo -u postgres pgd switchover --group-name <group_name> --node-name <new_write_leader_node_name>`

> 1. Confirm the current major Postgres version.

Reviewer: Probably want to move this "confirm the current postgres version" into planning

Author: Will do.

- Change the `config.yml` of the TPA-managed cluster to the new version.
  - `cluster_vars: postgres_version: '<new_version_number>'`
- Use `tpaexec` to redeploy the PGD cluster with the updated `config.yml`.
  - `tpaexec deploy <cluster_name>`

Details of these steps are shown in the worked example, specifically for upgrading a [shadow node](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/terminology/#write-leader) from Postgres 15 to Postgres 16. 

## Worked example

This worked example starts with a [TPA-managed PGD cluster deployed using the [AWS Quickstart](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/quickstart/quick_start_aws/). The cluster has three nodes: kaboom, kaolin, and kaftan, all running Postges 15.

In this scenario, the current write leader is kaftan. This example upgrades the first of two shadow nodes, kaboom.

!!! Note
Some steps of this process involve running commands as the Postgres owner. We refer to this user as postgres throughout, when appropriate. If you're running EDB Postgres Advanced Server, substitute the postgres user with enterprisedb in all relevant commands.
!!!

> ### Confirm the current Postgres version

Reviewer: Should this not be in the plan your upgrade?

Author: I see how it makes sense to put it in the plan. I had thought it would be the first step of the node-by-node steps, such that we would check the versions each time we were on a node to ensure things were being updated as we expected. Let me see if I can balance both these goals.

SSH into kaboom and use the following command to connect to PGD's `bdrdb` database:

```bash
sudo -u postgres psql bdrdb
```

When connected to `bdrdb`, use the following query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM bdr.group_versions_details;
```

The output is similar to this for your cluster:

```
  node_id   | node_name |        postgres_version        | bdr_version 
------------+-----------+--------------------------------+-------------
 3490219809 | kaftan    | 15.5 (Debian 15.5-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
 2710197610 | kaboom    | 15.5 (Debian 15.5-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
 2111777360 | kaolin    | 15.5 (Debian 15.5-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
(3 rows)
```

Confirm that the Postgres version is the expected version. Then, use the `exit` command to return to the node's command prompt.

### Stop Postgres on the target node

If you're not already on the target node, use SSH to connect to the target node (in this case, kaboom), and then run:

```bash
sudo systemctl stop postgres
```

This command halts the server on the current node, in this case, kaboom. Your cluster continues running using the other two nodes.

> ### Install the new Postgres version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install the new Postgres version and upgrade utility
```

While still on the target node, kaboom, install the new version of Postgres (PG16) and the upgrade tool:

```bash
sudo apt install edb-bdr5-pg16 edb-bdr-utilities
```

> ### Initialize Postgres 16

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Initialize new Postgres version
```

Make a new data directory for the upgraded Postgres, and give the postgres user ownership of the directory:

```bash
sudo mkdir /opt/postgres/datanew
sudo chown -R postgres:postgres /opt/postgres/datanew
```

Then, initialize Postgres 16 in the new directory:

```bash
sudo -u postgres /usr/lib/postgresql/16/bin/initdb \
  -D /opt/postgres/datanew \
  -E UTF8 \
  --lc-collate=en_US.UTF-8 \
  --lc-ctype=en_US.UTF-8 \
  --data-checksums
```

This command creates a PG16 data directory for configuration, `/opt/postgres/datanew`.

> ### Copy configuration for Postgres 15 to Postgres 16

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Copy configuration from old Postgres to new Postgres
```

> The next step copies the existing configuration (PG15) to the new PG16 data directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step copies the configuration files from the old Postgres version (PG15) to the new Postgres version's (PG16). Configuration files reside in each version's data directory.
```

Copy over the `postgresql.conf`, `postgresql.auto.conf`, and `pg_hba.conf` files and the whole `conf.d` directory:

```bash
sudo -u postgres cp /opt/postgres/data/postgresql.conf /opt/postgres/datanew/
sudo -u postgres cp /opt/postgres/data/postgresql.auto.conf /opt/postgres/datanew/
sudo -u postgres cp /opt/postgres/data/pg_hba.conf /opt/postgres/datanew/
sudo -u postgres cp -r /opt/postgres/data/conf.d/ /opt/postgres/datanew/
```

> ### Rename the PGDATA directories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Swap the data directories
```

Next, swap the PG15 and PG16 data directories: 

```bash
sudo mv /opt/postgres/data /opt/postgres/dataold
sudo mv /opt/postgres/datanew /opt/postgres/data
```

> !!! Important

Reviewer: Important or a note. It's not the good path but something to refer to if it breaks.

Author: Note seems better I agree.

If something goes wrong at some point during the procedure, you may want to rollback/revert a node to the older major version. To do this, rename directories again so that the current data directory, `/opt/postgres/data`, becomes `/opt/postgres/datafailed` and the old data directory, `/opt/postgres/dataold`, becomes the current data directory:

```bash
sudo mv /opt/postgres/data /opt/postgres/datafailed
sudo mv /opt/postgres/dataold /opt/postgres/data
```

This rolls back/reverts the node back to the previous major version of Postgres.
!!!

### Stop all Postgres instances

Although you previously stopped the Postgres service on the target node, kaboom, to be sure it's stopped, run the `stop` command for both instances of Postgres (PG15 and PG16) on
kaboom:

```bash

> sudo -u postgres /usr/lib/postgresql/15/bin/pg_ctl -D /opt/postgres/dataold stop

Reviewer: Will that even work? I suspect only if it's not running. (maybe test with a running db and do the directory swap and then stop it?)

Author: Okay I will test this.

sudo -u postgres /usr/lib/postgresql/16/bin/pg_ctl -D /opt/postgres/data stop
```

> !!! Note

Reviewer: This is looking a little messy. Wonder if we can tidy it up a bit. @MattWalliEDB any thoughts on how you'd check servers were stopped without reading the chicken entrails of errors?

Author: Can we grep for the pid or something?

Author: Or maybe we can just use systemctl status postgresql?

Author: I am changing the step to verify that postgres is stopped and using `systemctl status postgres` as it is clear that the server isn't running using this method I believe.

Advancing replication origin (bdr_bdrdb_rb69_bdr1, 0/1E8... ok
Creating replication slot (bdr_bdrdb_rb69_bdr1)             ok
Creating replication slot (bdr_bdrdb_rb69)                  ok
Creating replication slot (bdr_bdrdb_rb69_bdr2)             ok
Stopping new cluster
```

### Modify the Postgres service

The Postgres service on the system is configured to start the old version 
of Postgres (PG15). You need to modify the `postgres.service` file to start the new 
version (PG16). You can do this using `sed` to replace the old version
number `15` with `16` throughout the file. 

After you've changed the version number, you can tell the 
systemd daemon to reload the configuration. On the target node, run:

```bash
sudo sed -i -e  's/15/16/g' /etc/systemd/system/postgres.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

### Start Postgres

Start the modified Postgres service by running:

```bash
sudo systemctl start postgres
```

### Validate the Postgres version

Repeating the first step, check the version of Postgres to confirm that you upgraded kaboom correctly. While still on kaboom, run:

```bash
sudo -u postgres psql bdrdb
```

> 

Reviewer: Or just `select version()` to return that nodes version? Might be simpler and less info to parse.

```sql
SELECT * FROM bdr.group_versions_details;
```

The output is similar to this for your cluster. Use the output to confirm that kaboom is running the upgraded Postgres version. 

```
  node_id   | node_name |        postgres_version        | bdr_version 
------------+-----------+--------------------------------+-------------
 3490219809 | kaftan    | 15.5 (Debian 15.5-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
 2710197610 | kaboom    | 16.1 (Debian 16.1-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
 2111777360 | kaolin    | 15.5 (Debian 15.5-1EDB.buster) | 5.3.0
(3 rows)
```

### Test the upgrade

After the upgrade is complete on kaboom, test your databases thoroughly to ensure the upgrade was successful. Being still connected to kaboom ensures that your tests run specifically against the new version without interference from cluster routing mechanisms.

```bash
sudo -u postgres psql <database_name>
```

> Next, execute your test suite, including application transactions, queries, and other operations critical to your environment. Pay particular attention to performance metrics and compatibility with the new version. The insights gained from this controlled upgrade can inform your approach, helping to ensure a smoother transition for all nodes.

Reviewer: Well thats all well and good but did we mention "You should have a test suite you can deploy on any node" in the preamble? 

Also isn't the node returning to the cluster at this point?

Have we checked it is/isn't returning?

Author: Yeah, I will add something about needing a test suite in the preamble. 

For your second/third point here, did we ever remove the node from the cluster in the first place? I don't think I documented that we need to remove the node only that we need to stop postgres on the node. I assumed PGD would just not use it with postgres turned off on the node and that it would use it again with postgres turned back on on the node. What do I need to do to remove and or rejoin a node? Rejoining presumably only happens after the test suite has been run, correct?

Reviewer: Second/third point is about running a test suite on a node thats in the process of resyncing with the cluster. I don't recall this step in previous guides so not sure where this came from, but it feels potentially dangerous as a step.

Author: It's only dangerous if the node is syncing back with its group at the time of the testing right? The step to test seems right as part of upgrading process, correct?

Author: I am pulling the test suite content.

> ### Clean up post-upgrade

Reviewer: Ditto this vacuum step is somewhat scary. I'd check with someone (as I seriously don't know) whether a vacuum while joined to the cluster but not write leader could cause any issues.

Author: Do we have an eng contact I can use or do I need to find one for this?

Author: Reached out in #eng-pgd and this vacuum step is safe:

"This shouldn’t impact on data consistency as VACUUM isn’t replicated, but depending on the size of the database it may generate a bit of replication lag which shouldn’t take too long to catch up." William Ivanski

```

This command outputs a list of the different groups/subgroups running in your cluster and the write leader of each group. Write leaders need to be switched over to another node in their subgroup before they can be upgraded to maintain operational continuity, so you should upgrade them lastly when upgrading a subgroup of nodes to keep the number of planned switchovers to a minimum.

Even though you have verified which node is the current write leader for planning purposes, note that the write leader of a subgroup could change to another node at any moment for operational reasons before you upgrade that node. Therefore, you still need to verify that a node is not the write leader just before upgrading that node.

You now should have enough information to determine your upgrade order, one subgroup at a time, aiming to upgrade the identified write leader node last in each subgroup. 

### Perform the upgrade on each node

!!! Note
To help prevent data loss, ensure that your databases and configuration files are backed up before starting the upgrade process.
!!!

Using the [preliminary order](#prepare-the-upgrade), perform the following steps on each node while connected via SSH:

> * **Confirm the current Postgres version**

Author: I am just following the format DJ asked me too so that it is in line with what he is doing elsewhere in the PGD docs: https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/admin-manual/installing/05-creating-cluster/ 🤷

  -D /opt/postgres/datanew \
  -E UTF8 \
  --lc-collate=en_US.UTF-8 \
  --lc-ctype=en_US.UTF-8 \
  --data-checksums
```

This command creates a PG16 data directory for configuration, `/opt/postgres/datanew`.

### Migrate configuration to the new Postgres version

The next step copies the configuration files from the old Postgres version (PG15) to the new Postgres version's (PG16). Configuration files reside in each version's data directory.

Copy over the `postgresql.conf`, `postgresql.auto.conf`, and `pg_hba.conf` files and the whole `conf.d` directory:

```bash
sudo -u postgres cp /opt/postgres/data/postgresql.conf /opt/postgres/datanew/
sudo -u postgres cp /opt/postgres/data/postgresql.auto.conf /opt/postgres/datanew/
sudo -u postgres cp /opt/postgres/data/pg_hba.conf /opt/postgres/datanew/
sudo -u postgres cp -r /opt/postgres/data/conf.d/ /opt/postgres/datanew/
```

### Verify the Postgres service is inactive

Although you should have stopped [previously stopped the Postgres service on the target node](#stop-postgres-on-the-target-node), kaboom, to be sure it's stopped, verify by running the `systemctl status postgres` command:

```bash
sudo systemctl status postgres
```

> The output of the status command shows that the Postgres service has stopped running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The output of the `status` command shows that the Postgres service has stopped running:
```

```bash
sudo -u postgres pgd show-version
```

Use the output to confirm that kaboom is running the upgraded Postgres version:

 ```
Node   BDR Version Postgres Version               
----   ----------- ----------------               
kaboom 5.4.0       16.2 (Debian 16.2-2EDB.buster) 
kaftan 5.4.0       15.6 (Debian 15.6-2EDB.buster) 
kaolin 5.4.0       15.6 (Debian 15.6-2EDB.buster) 

```

Here kaboom has been upgraded to major version 16.

### Clean up post-upgrade

As a best practice, run a vacuum over the database at this point. When the upgrade ran, you may have noticed the post-upgrade report included:

```
Once you start the new server, consider running:
    /usr/lib/postgresql/16/bin/vacuumdb --all --analyze-in-stages
```

You can run the vacuum now. On the target node, run:

```bash
sudo -u postgres /usr/lib/postgresql/16/bin/vacuumdb --all --analyze-in-stages
```

If you're sure you don't need to revert this node, you can also clean up the old data directory folder `dataold`:

```bash
sudo rm -r /opt/postgres/dataold
```

You are now finished upgrading the target node.

### Next steps

After completing the upgrade on kaboom, run the same steps on kaolin and kaftan.

> If you followed along with this example and kaftan is the write leader, you must [perform a planned switchover](#perform-a-planned-switchover) to another, already upgraded, node before running the upgrade steps on kaftan to ensure availability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you followed along with this example and kaftan is the write leader, to ensure availability, you must [perform a planned switchover](#perform-a-planned-switchover) to another, already upgraded node before running the upgrade steps on kaftan.
```

> #### Check PG versions across the cluster 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Check Postgres versions across the cluster 
```

After completing the upgrade on all nodes, while connected to one of the nodes, you can once again check your versions:

```bash
sudo -u postgres pgd show-version
```

> The output should be similar to the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The output will be similar to the following:
```

## Overview

You can perform a major version upgrade of Postgres on a Postgres Distributed (PGD) cluster deployed by Trusted Postgres Architect (TPA).

The rolling upgrade process allows updating individual cluster nodes to a new major Postgres version while maintaining cluster availability and operational continuity. This approach minimizes downtime and ensures data integrity by allowing the rest of the cluster to remain operational as each node is upgraded sequentially. 

> We recommend upgrading your Postgres cluster to a newer major version to access improved features, performance enhancements, and security updates. These step-by-step instructions and a worked example help to provide a smooth and controlled upgrade process.

Reviewer 2: The one case we use first person.

### Plan the upgrade

> The cluster must be available throughout the process (that is, a *rolling* upgrade). To achieve continuous cluster availability, you must [perform a planned switchover](#performing-a-planned-switchover) of the [write leader](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/terminology/#write-leader) node before upgrading it so that a write leader is always available. 

Reviewer 2: House style is no latin abbreviations. 

"there is" tends to be a weak phrase

You can see which node is the write leader by connecting to the PGD cluster (for example, using SSH) and running the `pgd show-groups` command:

```bash
sudo -u postgres pgd show-groups
```

> To keep the number of planned [switchovers](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/cli/command_ref/pgd_switchover/) to a minimum, upgrade the current write leader last in your upgrade order, so you have to perform only [one planned switchover](#performing-a-planned-switchover) during the upgrade process.

Reviewer 2: Don't use "should" as it introduces uncertainty. 

Misplaced modifier (only).

### Perform the upgrade on each node

!!! Note

> To help prevent data loss, ensure that your databases and configuration files are backed up before starting the upgrade process.

Reviewer 2: Goal before action

!!!

> Next, perform the following steps on each node in order:

Reviewer 2: "carry out" is idiomatic and might not  be clear to non-native English speakers.

  - Move `/opt/postgres/data` to `/opt/postgres/dataold` and move `/opt/postgres/datanew` to `/opt/postgres/data`.
1. Double-check that both Postgres instances aren't running.
  - Use `pg_ctl` to stop both `/opt/postgres/dataold` and `/opt/postgres/data`.
1. Check that you can upgrade safely.
  - Use the `--check` option when running `bdr_pg_upgrade`.
1. Run the Postgres major version upgrade.
  - Run `bdr_pg_upgrade` again without the `--check` option.
1. Update the Postgres service configuration to the new version and refresh the system's service manager to apply the changes.
  - Replace the old version number with the new version number in the `postgres.service` file.
    - `sudo sed -i -e 's/<old_version_number>/<new_version_number>/g' /etc/systemd/system/postgres.service`
1. Start Postgres.
  - `systemctl start postgres`
1. Validate the new Postgres version. 
  - Connect to the `bdrdb` database and run `SELECT * FROM bdr.group_versions_details;`.
1. Test the upgrade directly against the newly upgraded node.
  - Run your test suite again while still connected by way of SSH into the newly upgraded node.

> 1. Clean up post-upgrade. 

Reviewer 2: This should have been an ordered list.

You might want to also do numbers under some of these sub-steps.

I think adding the detail makes this a lot harder to read given that all this info is in the details that follow. Just my two cents on this addition.

  - Run the new PG version's `vacuumdb`.
  - Remove the old version's data directory, `/opt/postgres/dataold`.

### Reconcile the upgrade with TPA

TPA needs to continue to manage the deployment effectively after the upgrade. Therefore, it's necessary to reconcile the upgraded nodes with TPA. Follow these steps to update the configuration and redeploy the PGD cluster through TPA.

- Change the `config.yml` of the TPA-managed cluster to the new version.
  - `cluster_vars: postgres_version: '<new_version_number>'`
- Use `tpaexec` to redeploy the PGD cluster with the updated `config.yml`.
  - `tpaexec deploy <cluster_name>`

> Details of these steps are shown in the worked example, specifically for upgrading a [shadow node](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/terminology/#write-leader) from Postgres 15 to Postgres 16. 

Reviewer 2: We don't write in first person but anyhow this text uses a mix. Let's stick with second person.

## Worked example

This worked example starts with a [TPA-managed PGD cluster deployed using the [AWS Quickstart](https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/quickstart/quick_start_aws/). The cluster has three nodes: kaboom, kaolin, and kaftan, all running Postges 15.

In this scenario, the current write leader is kaftan. This example upgrades the first of two shadow nodes, kaboom.

!!! Note

> Some steps of this process involve running commands as the Postgres owner. We refer to this user as postgres throughout, when appropriate. If you're running EDB Postgres Advanced Server, substitute the postgres user with enterprisedb in all relevant commands.

Reviewer 2: First person is hard to avoid in this case.

```bash
sudo -u postgres psql bdrdb
```

> When connected to bdrdb, use the following query:

Reviewer 2: Don't know why I can't edit, but bdrdb should be tagged.

Author: I fixed it.

### Stop Postgres on the target node

If you're not already on the target node, use SSH to connect to the target node (in this case, kaboom), and then run:

```bash
sudo systemctl stop postgres
```

> This command halts the server on the current node, in this case, kaboom. Your cluster continues running using the other two nodes.

Reviewer 2: No future tense unless it's truly a future action.

pg_ctl: PID file "/opt/postgres/data/postmaster.pid" does not exist
Is server running?
```
This error is expected when both instances of Postgres are already shut down. Therefore, it doesn't prevent the upgrade from progressing.
!!!

### Check that you can upgrade safely

The `bdr_pg_upgrade` tool has a `--check` option, which performs a dry run of some of the upgrade process. You can use this option to ensure the upgrade goes smoothly.

> However, first you need a directory for the files created by `bdr_pg_upgrade`. For this example, create an `/upgrade` directory in the `/home` directory. Then give ownership of the directory to the user postgres. 

Reviewer 2: I'm not a fan of the word "accordingly." It sounds academic and it raises the reading level.

### Clean up post-upgrade

> As best practice, run a vacuum over the database at this point. When the upgrade ran, you may have noticed the post-upgrade report included:

Reviewer 2: Was "over to" an error? It looked like it but my edit could be wrong...

Author: it was an error yes :-)

```
Once you start the new server, consider running:
    /usr/lib/postgresql/16/bin/vacuumdb --all --analyze-in-stages
```

> You can do run the vacuum now. On the target node, run:

Reviewer 2: I don't know why I'm not able to edit this, but there's an extra word.

After completing the upgrade on kaboom, run the same steps to upgrade the other shadow node, namely kaolin.

After kaolin, only kaftan needs to be upgraded. However, because kaftan is the write leader, perform a planned switchover before running the upgrade steps on the node to ensure availability.

#### Performing a planned switchover

> When you're ready to upgrade kaftan, SSH into kaftan and switch over the write leader from kaftan to an already upgraded shadow node, for example, kaboom:

Reviewer 2: Verb form vs adjective form.
